---
date: 2025-12-20
tags: [ghosts, paranormal, haunting, indie]
layout: post
author: Xy
type: Review
playtime-at-review: 5.0 hours
title: Unmourned
image: 'images/posts/2025-12-20-review-unmourned/hero.webp'
featured: false
---

Unmourned was a game completely off my radar. This is a rare occasion where I went in completely blind as I watched half the trailer and said, “yep, that looks good!”, bought it and played through it in one sitting. If you have the opportunity to do the same for any horror game, I highly recommend it. Horror trailers are notorious for putting some of their most tense moments leading to a spoiled jumpscare every so often. For my play-through, I was always anticipating the next event and it adds so much more to the tension. 

You play as Jason, a new homeowner to a house that has some dark secrets. The first scene gives you a front row seat into those exact secrets and it's some of the most horrific acts you can think of. The story could have been more intertwined. Jason's story seemed to have nothing to do with the original family aside from being an unlucky third party who happened to purchase a haunted house. It probably would've tied the whole thing together nicely if he had some stake in the story, like was a distant relative or something similar. 

The game remains consistent for ¾, but then switches completely for the final act. It's pretty jarring you may find yourself wondering if you're suddenly playing an entirely different game. This isn't only because the setting and characters change, but some of the game mechanics change while others are abandoned entirely. It's unfortunate, because you may be taken out of the game for this section and might find that it's starting to drag out a little too much. 

The scares are more than sufficient for any horror fan. It's worth mentioning again, going in completely blind will keep you on your toes pretty much the entire game. A few moments in the game are sure to give you goosebumps, with some being quite subtle and others being right in your face. There were some very tense moments and the ghost chases were something that other games should take note of (looking at you Phasmophobia) as each ghost had their own personality. Some of the creepy encounters are a little more subtle and if you're not really paying attention, you might miss it. It's great when horror games do this because it serves as a reminder that there's a payoff for being mindful. 

The settings/locations ranged from claustrophobic tight air vents, to opulent mansions, to medieval churches and towns, to an ethereal void. Some of the visuals are stunning and truly surreal. The game jumps between reality and nightmares fairly often so there are scenes that do a great job playing into that. The house Jason bought feels pretty big, particularly for a bachelor. There are some time jumps that show the previous content and design of the house that's pretty interesting to see. At one point you'll end up at a concert hall that is particularly well designed. 

Graphics are nothing to write home about for the time of release in 2025. That's not to say they're bad in any way, they're just not groundbreaking. And that's alright because regardless of your computer setup, you should be able to crank up the settings and enjoy the game to its fullest potential. With prices for upgrades of a PC nowadays, we might be in for more games to scale back a bit on the recommended requirements. The models and props in the game were definitely well crafted… pair that with the level design and you'll see that's how this game really shines through. 

The audio was well done especially for a horror game. All the audio designed to scare you or creep you out hit their marks well. The voice acting was very good for the most part. All but the main protagonist was highly convincing and even by the end, his lines start to pick up in quality. You might find that some of the areas could do with a little ambience because it’s almost too quiet, and not in that good horror trope kind of way. There was some mismatched audio, like a ceiling fan sounding like it was powered by a giant electric motor. One thing to note is if you're planning on making a video or streaming it, YouTube does flag a few of the music tracks with copyright. 

The controls were your standard WASD keyboard movement, shift for run, ctrl for crouch, left mouse to interact. One thing I really enjoyed was the middle mouse for zooming. This isn't exclusive to Unmourned, but it's a nice feature that allows you to get a closer look at some of the textures and artwork in the game. You may even find yourself using it to get a better look at that creepy thing happening just off in the distance.

Unmourned has an insanity meter that is unfortunately largely forgettable. There's an eye icon in the lower right corner that changes from opaque to fully visible when your sanity is low. You can “recharge” it by standing in the light, but there isn't much consistency in what the game considers light. When it is low, you'll be left wondering if there are any penalties for letting it get so low. Maybe it triggers more ghost chases, but it's not prevalent in the game either way. It would be more interesting if it caused a visual trigger similar to Amnesia: The Dark Descent. The previously mentioned mechanic that is abandoned towards the end of the game is the sanity meter. To be honest, you might not even notice it's gone. 

The game progresses in a linear fashion with some frustration points where the objective is left empty and you're left wandering trying to trigger the next event to progress. No one wants excessive hand holding, but there are definitely moments throughout the game that feel a touch aimless. A good example is one of the first objectives. You're prompted to find a key to the basement upstairs. (Here's a spoiler you're going to want… <span class=”spoiler”>it's in a drawer in one of the hallways.</span>) The reason it's frustrating is there's zero direction from the objective such as “<span class=”spoiler”>it's in a drawer</span>”, so you end up searching the many table surfaces, the closets, baskets, shelves, and the 20+ empty drawers. Not ideal for an objective as simple as “find the key”. This type of frustration happens a couple times throughout the game where you end up a bit lost, wishing for the objective to at least point you in the more targeted direction. 

Despite some of the flaws, I definitely enjoyed my time with Unmourned and would likely play it again. I noticed some nods to games like Silent Hill and P.T. like prominent characters having the names Mary and Lisa, and I swear there's a spot in the game that was designed to give you pause knowing you've seen it before in P.T. not to mention a few P.T. inspired game mechanics. 

Another thing to note is that I never ran into any game breaking bugs, if any bugs at all, so it does feel like a good polished game as I went through it. I completed the game in just over 5 hours. In that time there was a single achievement that I missed that would've got me to the 100% mark. Whether or not that amount of time makes the game worth it is more or less up to you. It's still relatively new, so I wouldn't expect a crazy sale on Steam any time soon. I paid about $30CDN and don't really have any buyers remorse. That said, I've paid less for games and put in many more hours. 

4/6
